Government of Canada's landmark agreement recognizes Musqueam First Nation's Aboriginal title in Metro Vancouver
Kenneth Chan
|
Feb 28 2026, 3:56 pm

Musqueam Indian Band asserts much of the western area of Metro Vancouver is their traditional territory. (BC Treaty Commission)
Control over fisheries, marine planning, and emergency response along parts of the South Coast of British Columbia will increasingly be shared with the Musqueam Indian Band under three new agreements signed with the Government of Canada last week.

More importantly, the deals also formally recognize Musqueam’s Aboriginal rights and establish a framework for joint governance in the First Nation’s traditional territory.

These agreements are being described by both sides as a practical step toward implementing Aboriginal rights under the Canadian Constitution, according to a news release.

You might also like:
'Not coming for anyone's private property': Musqueam First Nation seeks win-win relationships
Musqueam First Nation to receive a share of federal revenues from Vancouver airport
B.C. government adds 49,000 acres of land near Howe Sound and the Sea to Sky Corridor to the territory of the Squamish Nation
Majority of B.C. residents worried about impact of Aboriginal title ruling: survey
Aboriginal title ruling killed initial sale deal for Richmond luxury hotel
Langley Township to join appeal over Aboriginal title ruling impacting private property rights
B.C. premier committed to amending DRIPA law to uphold government authority
Rather than a single sweeping deal, the package establishes a framework for gradual implementation.

It recognizes Musqueam’s rights within its territory and sets up formal processes for shared decision-making.

The full details and terms of the agreements are not immediately known as they have not been made public, but this “Rights Recognition Agreement” is by far the most consequential, as it “recognizes that Musqueam has Aboriginal rights including title within their traditional territory and establishes a framework for incremental implementation of rights and nation-to-nation relations with Canada.”

In simpler terms, it means the federal government is formally acknowledging that Musqueam holds Aboriginal rights — including Aboriginal title on land — within its traditional territory and is committing to work out, step by step, how those rights will be put into practice. The agreement creates a structured framework for gradually implementing Musqueam’s authority in decision-making over much of the Lower Mainland’s lands and waters.

“Our Musqueam community celebrates these historic agreements as a step forward in our path to Reconciliation. In signing these agreements, the Government of Canada is acknowledging Musqueam’s Aboriginal title and rights to our traditional territory and recognizing our expertise in both marine management and fisheries management,” said Musqueam chief Wayne Sparrow in a statement.

“This is another example of how Musqueam is a leader and is taking a different approach on innovative agreements with partners like the Government of Canada, that benefit the greater community and contribute to a joint sustainable future.”

Their traditional territory includes the region’s mountainous, forested watershed that feed into Metro Vancouver’s drinking water reservoirs, as well as West Vancouver, North Vancouver City, North Vancouver District, Vancouver, the University of British Columbia, the University Endowment Lands, Burnaby, Port Moody, Anmore, Belcarra, Coquitlam, New Westminster, Richmond, Vancouver International Airport, the northern areas of Delta and Surrey, and the waterways. It overlaps with several other First Nations.

Musqueam Indian Band asserts much of the western area of Metro Vancouver is their traditional territory. (Musqueam Indian Band)

Additionally, joint working groups will guide the marine stewardship agreement, while a separate fisheries agreement provides funding and resources — including support for access, vessels and gear — to expand Musqueam’s participation in fisheries management.

Rebecca Alty, federal minister of Crown-Indigenous Relations Canada, stated, “Reconciliation is not just words, but action — where Musqueam and Canada are working to incrementally implement Musqueam’s Aboriginal rights within their territory. These represent important step forward in our nation-to-nation relationship with Musqueam. They honour Musqueam’s Aboriginal rights while strengthening the foundation of our collaborative working relationship.”

The minister further asserts that this is part of the strategy of “building a stronger, more united Canada.”

The agreements build on recent developments, including the “Musqueam Self-Government Agreement” initialed in March 2025 and the Vancouver International Airport Revenue Sharing Agreement signed in February 2025, which sets aside a portion of the annual revenue the federal government receives from Vancouver Airport Authority to the First Nation.

The agreements are being signed at a time when debates over Indigenous rights, land use, and resource development in British Columbia have become increasingly polarized.

From disputes over land title and conservation areas to tensions around economic development projects, questions about how Indigenous authority fits within provincial and federal systems continue to divide communities and business and political leaders.

Musqueam is also among several parties — including the provincial and federal governments, City of Richmond, and others — appealing the Supreme Court of B.C.’s August 2025 decision granting the Vancouver Island-based Cowichan Tribes Aboriginal title over a large area of both public and private lands in southeast Richmond. Musqueam argues that this area is a part of their traditional territory, and have joined the effort to have the decision overturned.

The Cowichan Tribes ruling has had an immediate impact on private property owners in the affected area and has raised concerns that it could set a precedent affecting fee-simple private property across British Columbia and potentially elsewhere in Canada, and deter economic activity and investment through its impact on real estate.

Sparrow says under his leadership, the Musqueam are taking a different approach outside of the courts. In a statement issued in December 2025 addressing growing public concern over the implications of the Cowichan Tribes decision, Sparrow said the Nation’s long-standing strategy has been to prioritize negotiations with governments — rather than litigation — when seeking the transfer of government-owned public lands within areas it considers part of its traditional territory. He added that Musqueam is not pursuing private property through these agreements.

“Musqueam is not coming for anyone’s private property,” said Sparrow in December 2025. “Our approach to traditional unceded territory is one of partnership and relationship with our neighbours, not trying to take away our neighbours’ private property.”

As well, this spring, the provincial government is expected to move legislation to amend its controversial Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples Act (DRIPA) to clarify that reconciliation work is the responsibility of government — not the courts — and to help ensure private property is protected.